in this video we're diving into one of
the most exciting features of spelt 5
reactivity with runes if you've been
using spelt for a while you might know
that reactivity is at the core of what
makes spelt so powerful but in spelt 5
reactivity has been reimagined with a
new system called runes runes make
reactivity more explicit flexible and
easier to understand by the end of this
video you'll know how to use runes to
declare reactive State create computed
values and write reactive statements but
before we jump into reactivity let's
start with the basics simple statements
simple statements are just regular
JavaScript code that runs once when your
component is initialized they don't
automatically rerun when data changes
they're just plain old JavaScript for
example let's say we have a variable
called message that holds the string
hello world we can log this message to
the console when the component is
created in this example message is a
regular variable it doesn't change
unless we explicitly update it the
console. log statement runs only once
when the component is created we can
also use these variables in the template
by wrapping these variables inside curly
braces this way we can display the
values of the variables inside the
template now run the
app we can see the message displayed
here and if we open the console the
message is also printed here simple
statements like this are great for
initializing data setting up constants
or performing onetime calculations but
what if we want our data to be reactive
that's where runes come in let's talk
about reactive States in spelt 5 you
declare reactive State using the state
Rune it is written with the dollar sign
the state Rune marks a variable as
reactive meaning spelt will
automatically track changes to it and
update the Dom whenever the value
changes here's an example let's create a
reactive variable called count and
initialize it to zero then we'll add a
button here we'll use onclick attribute
and pass it Anonymous method which
performs the increment to count variable
this onclick attribute will run this
method every time button is clicked
after it we used paragraph to display
the value of count now run the
app button and paragraph are dis expain
if we press the increment button the
value of count variable is increment by
one and state of the variable also
updates in UI in this example count is a
reactive variable when the button is
clicked count is increment and the Dom
automatically updates to reflect the new
value the state Rune ensures that spelt
tracks changes to count and reenders the
component when it changes one of the
biggest advantages of state is that it
makes reactivity explicit in spelt 4
reactivity was implicit meaning spelt
would automatically make variables
reactive based on how you use them but
in spel 5 you explicitly declare
reactive State using state which makes
your code easier to understand and debu
now that we know how to declare reactive
State let's talk about side effects side
effects are actions that happen in
response to changes in your reactive
State like logging to the console
fetching data or manipulating the Dom in
spelt five you handle side effects using
the dollar effect rune for example let's
say we want to log the value of count
every time it changes for that we'll use
effect Rune and inside it we'll create a
method which logs the count value this
method will run every time the value of
count changes now run the
program Open the
console now when we click on the
increment button updated value value of
count is automatically printed in the
console in this example the effect Rune
creates a side effect that runs whenever
count changes it logs the new value of
count to the console the effect Rune
automatically tracks its dependencies so
it knows when to rerun one important
thing to note is that effect runs after
the Dom has been updated this makes it
perfect for side effects that depend on
the updated state or Dom next up let's
talk about computed values computed
values are values that depend on other
reactive state in spelt 5 you create
computed values using the derived Rune
the derived Rune ensures that the
computed value is automatically
recalculated whenever its dependencies
change for example let's say we have a
reactive variable count and we want to
create a computed value called double
count that always holds the value of
count multiplied by two now run the app
now if we click the button the value of
count updates and the value of double
count variable get multiplied by two in
this example double count is a computed
value that depends on count whenever
count changes double count is
automatically recalculated computed
values are readon meaning you can't
directly assign a value to double count
it's derived from count computed values
are a great way to keep your logic clean
and avoid redundant calculations spelt
ALS Al optimizes computed values to
ensure they're only recalculated when
necessary which makes them very
efficient finally let's talk about State
updates updating reactive state in spelt
5 is straightforward when you update a
reactive State variable spelt
automatically triggers reactivity and
updates the Dom for example let's add a
reset function to our counter component
this function will set count back to
zero when called then create a new
button and call reset function on button
click now run the
app now click on increment button count
and double count values are updated now
if we click the reset button the value
of both variables gets reset to zero in
this example the reset function updates
the count state to zero since count is
reactive the Dom updates to reflect the
new value State updates can be triggered
by user interactions time ERS or
asynchronous operations spelt also
batches multiple State updates for
better performance so you don't have to
worry about unnecessary renders now that
we've covered the basics let's see how
we can combine State derived and effect
runes to build more complex reactive
logic here's an example that ties
everything together in this example we
have a reactive State variable count a
computed value double count and a side
effect that logs both values whenever
they change
we also have two functions one to
increment the count and second to reset
it then we have two buttons one for
increment and other for reset in these
buttons we called both increment and
reset functions next we have paragraphs
to display the values of count and
double count variables now run the
app open
console now click on increment button
values are updating in paragraph graphs
as well as in the console now if we
click on reset button values reset to
zero this is a good example of how you
can combine runes to build powerful and
reactive components we've covered
everything you need to know about
reactivity with runes in spelt 5 you
learned how to declare reactive state
with State handle side effects with
effect compute derived values with
derived and update state to trigger
reactivity runes make reactivity in
spelt five more explicit and flexible
and I'm really excited to see how you'll
use them in your projects with this
runes section is complete